# DDoS Classification

> A data science project where I analyzed statistical models for classifying DDoS data

### Introduction

My paper attempts to answer three main questions. Using an Intrusion Detection System (IDS) to monitor network traffic, what aspects of the network traffic indicate signs of a DDoS attack? Using an IDS, can we consistently and accurately detect a DDoS attack? If so, what statistical learning model can most reliably detect DDoS traffic? Before I describe my analysis, first I want to explain a little bit about a DDoS attack and why I decided to choose this topic.

A distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack is a malicious attempt to disrupt normal traffic of a server or network by flooding the infrastructure with internet traffic. The reason DDoS attacks are so effective is unlike a normal denial-of-service (DoS) attack it utilizes multiple compromised networks as sources of internet traffic in order to take down the specific server. The typical way this is done is by spreading a virus to many different computers to form a botnet that can allow these computers to be instructed remotely to send traffic to the attacked server. The most common way to overwhelm a server is to provide as much bandwidth as possible to the specific machine until it cannot properly respond to any other HTTP requests. A reason that web servers are vulnerable to this attack is that a HTTP request is very cheap to execute on the client side, however, can be expensive for the server to respond as often the server will have to retrieve information from a database or load multiple files. Although it is often difficult for hackers to take down big companies such as google or amazon with DoS attacks. With a big enough botnet, it is getting more common for hackers to even be able to take down even website able to handle large amounts of bandwidth. For example, in 2012 hackers targeted six major US banks including Bank of America and JP Morgan Chase and over three days were able disrupt services and slow down the bank’s services. DDoS attacks can be very costly for small, medium, and even large companies if their website is critical to their business. This is why it is very important to be able to detect and block traffic from the computers that are involved in a DDoS attack. In 2018 GitHub was hit with the largest DDoS attack to date with a record breaking 1.3 terabits per second. However, since they were using a DDoS protection service, they were able to contain and stop the attack within 10 minutes.

In order to understand my project, it is important to understand the idea of an Intrusion Detection System (IDS). An IDS monitors network traffic to look for suspicious activity or threats. In this instance we will be using data from IDS’s that have been specifically subject to DDoS attacks to gain insights on DDoS attacks and how they appear on an IDS.

After analyzing data from both datasets, I have been able to find out both what aspects of data characterize DDoS traffic and how to accurately model this data. I have been able to pinpoint three specific features in the data that are the most important for DDoS classification. Additionally, I have been able to classify DDoS data with a ~99.71% accuracy and figure out the best approach to classification for this data. When using an IDS there are three key features that characterize DDoS traffic, minimum segment size in the forward direction, flow duration/speed, and initial window bytes/packets per second. Additionally, since the data is not linearly separable a tree-based classification model is the best detection approach because it provides accurate and interpretable results.
